[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Ivan Rados
began his life as an artist.
But as with many
artists, he also
was an empath and intuitive.
This is the path to the great
art, that openness to what is.
The path of discovery
begins with understanding
consciousness.
As Ivan describes
it, consciousness
is both conscious of and
impartial to the activity
of the mind.
Even when it's wreaking
havoc on our lives,
it has the immense
power of creation.
Ivan is with us to
talk about finding
our own truth, a tall
order while living
among perpetual messaging
in our daily lives.
And we're going to talk
about that in a little bit.
I mean, disturbing
how much messaging
is hitting every
human being per day,
unless you're living in
the Outback somewhere.
>>IVAN RADOS: Yeah, the
most disturbing message
you can send or give to
people is to tell them
you are not your mind.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>RADOS: Because then
people will defend that.
Because when they are
defending the mind,
they are defending
their attachment
to society rules and
norms, conditions.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
We're going to go way deep
into that in a little bit.
First I wanted to let people
know who you are a little bit.
I mean, you're really
a world famous artist.
You've had a very
successful career
as an artist, modern era.
You've been featured in
the Tate Museum in London.
And with the work you're
doing now is absolutely divine
because it's speaking to
us in another language,
your language, which
is sacred geometry.
And sacred geometry,
as it's shown
through your beautiful
yantra work, which we'll show
throughout our conversation.
So let's talk a little bit about
your early life and career,
and then ultimately,
how you segued
into what you're doing now.
>>RADOS: Oh, that's tough.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
We have an hour.
Just tell us your life story.
>>RADOS: I'd rather give
this task to someone else
to talk about my past than
me talking about my past
because that past is gone.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>RADOS: Certain memories
are left, you know?
But thanks to the question,
I can revive some memories
and open my mind
to talk about it.
>>REGINA: OK.
I would appreciate it.
>>RADOS: In order to
reference something,
in order to point at
something, which is useful.
Which can be useful,
which can be helpful.
>>REGINA: Yes, it can.
>>RADOS: Yes.
So I was born--
actually, my body
was born in former Yugoslavia.
And I have a
relationship with my body
but not with the place
where my body was born.
So my body was born there in
the family of alcoholic father
and Catholic-- orthodox
Catholic devoted mother.
So in that--
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>RADOS: --that dynamic of
causes and consequences,
my father would come drunk,
my mother would complain,
my father would yell,
my mother would--
>>REGINA: Preach?
>>RADOS: Preach.
And then me and my sister
would be punished at the end.
So my mother would say, I'm
doing all of that for you.
I love you.
So I grew up in the atmosphere
of a very dysfunctional family.
And in a way-- in a way I
knew that I chose that family
for a particular reason.
In a way, I respected their
wish to be there not for me,
but to be there for
something greater and more
powerful than what life is
providing at the moment.
Some abstract ideas, some
beliefs, dysfunctionality,
fantasies, dreams.
My father had the dream
to go away from the town
and live somewhere else.
My father wanted to achieve
heaven, attain heaven.
So they would clash then-- us
kids, me and sister would be
[INAUDIBLE].
So very manipulative
way of existing.
And I wanted to go out.
Not out of my family,
but out of that imprint,
out of that possibility.
My son was born in
'97, called Kai.
And my father called me
and said, oh, thanks God.
You have a son, so
you can continue
tradition of the Rados family.
And I said, what tradition?
Tradition of bullying,
tradition of not listening?
Tradition of not being there?
Not loving?
Not supporting?
That kind of tradition?
I don't want that tradition.
I'm going to destroy
all the traditions.
And that was the beginning of
my deeper search to find myself.
So but before that, I had
glimpses of, I want to go out.
I wanted to find my way.
I wanted to find myself.
So I asked my grandma.
She was a very wise one.
I said, Grandma--
yeah, but I forgot
to tell you that
before that, I used
to touch people,
kids in the school,
touching them if
they had any problem.
Sort of like compassion.
In a way, you came to
predict as empathy.
But I didn't know that.
So touching them, and they
would be healthy again.
Stomachache, headache.
So kids used to come, you know?
Age seven, eight, nine.
And said, oh, I
have a toothache.
Can you help me?
So my principal
called my mother.
And my mother was really
furious and said, what are you
doing there, you know?
You have to stop doing that.
>>REGINA: Why was she so
afraid of what you did?
>>RADOS: Because of being
judged by other people.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>RADOS: You see?
>>RADOS: Society's
controlling you
by you giving your
responsibility to society.
So society will tell you who
you are, what you have to be,
where you have to go.
And so anyway, I asked my
grandma, and my grandma said,
you have that talent.
You have the energy inside of
you to be great with yourself.
And so you can be a healer.
But people will
not understand you.
And you will clash with
principal, and then later
on with other people
as you grow up.
So it's better to channel that.
How to channel that?
And she said, go into art.
And I said, yeah.
I can do that.
I can channel that
energy into art.
>>REGINA: Sounds like your
grandma was a wise person.
Was she also a healer
or an intuitive?
>>RADOS: In to herbs-- like
I remember twisting my ankle.
As you would come and cut
onion in half and salt
it with sea salt. And she would
put that on my ankle, and ankle
would be healed in less
than an hour or two.
>>REGINA: No.
>>RADOS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Really.
>>RADOS: Try that.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Oh, you
just get-- lovely.
OK.
So cut onion, put sea salt
on it, then put it on wound.
>>RADOS: Put it on the wound.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
Thank you.
>>RADOS: But it can be painful.
>>REGINA: I bet it can.
>>RADOS: But you have
to go through the pain.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it'll burn.
Interesting.
OK.
Go ahead.
Yes.
>>RADOS: And I went
into art, studied art.
>>REGINA: Was this
available to you,
or was this something that was
promoted by the school as well?
>>RADOS: No, no, no.
It was my own decision.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>RADOS: I decided, I'm
going to be an artist.
So at the time I
decided to be an artist,
I was already
involved in acting.
I was acting in theater.
>>REGINA: How old were you?
>>RADOS: I was 17.
>>REGINA: 17, OK.
>>RADOS: 16.
>>REGINA: Had you
already exhibited
some artistic ability?
>>RADOS: No.
Age 19, I exhibited in Sarajevo.
My first exhibition.
>>REGINA: And you started at 17?
You've discovered
yourself at 17.
So this was latent.
>>RADOS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: So by the way, age
15, I've lifted my astral body.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Tell us about that.
>>RADOS: Yeah.
So, like, watching myself from
the ceiling and just realizing,
oh, I'm really
grateful for this.
Wow.
But immediately, the thought
of fear came, and I was--
--down there in my body.
And that triggered me
to explore certain ways
and certain methods to
attain my lost self.
My lost self meaning
that I lost myself
being raised by my family.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
OK, so now you are 17.
You decide you're
going to be an artist.
Or that's when you start acting?
Both?
>>RADOS: That's right.
>>REGINA: OK.
And was it just something that
immediately expressed itself,
your incredible talent?
>>RADOS: It expressed
itself in an incredible way
because I was so amazed by what
was coming out of me, you see?
I was educating myself.
What we see as education,
it's nothing else
than indoctrination.
Educational systems are
indoctrinating kids,
giving them information.
This is information you have
to remember and act according
to that information, create
your life according to that,
think consensus.
But the real
meaning of education
is to draw out, to express--
>>REGINA: Not to pound in.
>>RADOS: Not to pound in.
To express, do rediscover
something inside that
is there as a potential.
So expressing it can
be painful because you
have to go through
the dark wounds
in order to understand
them, in order
to express through the
creativity something that
is beyond those wounds
and the pain, you see?
And I was going
through that process
of rediscovering myself,
experiencing my anger,
experiencing my jealousy.
>>REGINA: Was this
was showing itself
very literally in your artwork?
>>RADOS: Exactly.
Exactly.
Painting creatures.
My phantasmagoric dreams
and my nightmares.
I used to rip canvases and
paint them over and throw them
in garbage, burn them
with fire because I
was not-- I was going through
the internal process of giving
birth to myself.
So at one point, war happens,
and I found myself in England.
And thanks to that war, that war
took all the past away from me.
I'm very grateful.
I mean, unfortunately people
died, and people suffered.
For what, I don't know.
For the glory of the
mind of the powerful one.
But individually, I would
say that thanks to that war,
I finally disconnected from
my past and everything else.
And that set me on the journey
of really self-discovery
and using my art as
the spiritual method
in order to attain that.
>>REGINA: Did you leave
Yugoslavia during those times
alone or with your family?
>>RADOS: With my
girlfriend in the time.
>>REGINA: In the time.
OK.
>>RADOS: Yes.
And then went to England,
stationed myself there.
Very soon, got an
international art studio,
I think off Halifax.
That's northern Yorkshire.
Stayed there for 10 years
working intensively.
>>REGINA: Studying English.
>>RADOS: Studying English.
Well, while my wife was studying
English for me, I was painting.
Studying myself
through the painting.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: Yeah.
And at one point,
I was painting--
I took this spiritual approach,
art as my spiritual approach,
in tantric way.
I decided, I'm going to paint.
I'm going to go to my studio.
And I would say to Lana-- Lana,
don't expect me, you know?
>>REGINA: For how long?
>>RADOS: For how long?
Whenever I arrive.
And I would go there and be with
my brush and paint and myself
alone, and expressing,
educating myself.
Not sleeping, not eating.
Only drinking water, as
I'm drinking right now.
So for three, four days.
At one point-- I can't remember.
19-- 1999?
Just before millennium, 2000.
I stayed five days with no
drink, no water, no sleep.
>>REGINA: Well, now,
that would create
some good hallucinations.
>>RADOS: Just water.
It created, at the
beginning-- of the three
days it created-- during those
three days, hallucinations.
My body was really wrecked.
Totally tired.
Absolutely exhausted.
Anxiety was kicking in.
The fear and all of that.
And I passed those
three challenging days,
and the fourth one
was in a way peaceful.
But I knew that this peaceful
was created because I passed
the first layer of energy.
And then coming to the second
one where more tranquil,
more peaceful.
But still, I had to
battle with my canvases.
I was fighting my canvases.
Fighting canvases, fighting
colors and clashing them
and with the brushes
and all of that.
I was clashing with my own self.
I was clashing myself in my
own mind between my good aspect
of me and bad aspect of me.
And there's just the
war there happening.
And then fifth day, I
remember that I was so tired.
I was so mentally tired,
exhausted physically.
And I decided I have to go home.
At that moment, my
body collapsed totally.
I could not wake up.
And I was aware.
And the thought came.
One thought came
ripping my head off.
And that thought said,
you are absolute failure.
Through the conflict, I come
to the feeling of failure.
And I surrender myself.
I surrendered the
thought of failure.
If I'm failure, there's no way
I can live in myself that way.
So I totally relaxed.
Totally--
>>REGINA: You gave up.
>>RADOS: Not gave up.
I gave in.
>>REGINA: Gave in.
OK.
Better put, yes.
>>RADOS: And then-- but
awareness was there.
Awareness that I am.
And that awareness was there
for I don't know for how long.
A day, two, three, five I
was there lying, not moving.
At one point, Lana was
ringing in my head.
>>REGINA: I was
going to say, yeah.
When did she come
and round you up?
>>RADOS: So I went home.
And that changed everything.
So after that, I see
reality differently.
I see actually
myself differently.
And then as a consequence of
seeing myself differently,
the reality changed around me.
>>REGINA: Yes.
You know, one thing I really
have spent more time thinking
about recently--
and it had to do
with reading a book
regarding children who
are some of the new
wave of children--
and I know Kai is quite special.
And these children
who are so sensitive,
they feel everything.
They can barely sit
down because they're
absorbing so much of
the energy around them
that they need to dispel
it by just moving, just
moving all the time.
And as I was reading that, I
kept thinking about artists
and musicians, and how in
order to create at that level,
you would have to have
that degree of sensitivity.
And often, these
little kids have had
problems, people judging them.
In your case, you were an
empath and a little healer
when you were just
a little tiny guy.
So this is something I think
that the world needs to have,
or the rest of the
people in the world
need to learn to respect when
we read about artists that
are going off the rails, artists
that have turned to drugs
and reckless behavior,
and so forth because
of this sensitivity.
Can you talk about that?
>>RADOS: Yes.
The reason for that,
art is going away.
Away from goodness,
put it this way.
And it's because artists
don't carry themselves
with what they're doing.
>>REGINA: Explain
what you mean by that,
that they don't carry themselves
with what they're doing.
What do you mean?
>>RADOS: They are not
aware what they are doing.
They're not conscious while
whatever they're doing.
So carrying on, being--
paying attention to themselves
while paying attention to what
they're doing, whatever that
might be.
The idea of achieving
something, the idea of attaining
something, attaining great
painting, showing the world
that I'm the great artist.
Being aware of that attempt,
being aware of that ego input,
but also being aware of the
one who created that input.
>>REGINA: Is it possible that
through that extreme openness
combined with ego and to excel--
>>RADOS: Then you
become creative.
>>REGINA: But aren't
you also a vehicle
for pretty much
anything that's there?
>>RADOS: You open
yourself to the wholeness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: You don't
have preconceived
idea of what to paint.
You don't have
preconceived idea of what
to create in the reality.
You have just openness
and receptivity.
And whatever comes,
you just express that.
You use the mind as a tool,
not being used by your mind.
Do you see the point?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: So generally,
99.99% of population on earth
is used by the mind.
And the mind is the
master of people's life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: And the mind is
controlled by society.
You have to think certain way,
you have to behave certain way.
You have to be certain way.
You have to show your support,
your loyalty, your obedience.
You have to follow certain
norms and conditions, morality
and stuff like that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: But when you get out
of that obligation of fulfilling
the ideas of what
life is, according
to the mind,
expectations and desires,
then you come to the real life
that is called individuality,
you become individual.
You can live in the society,
but you cannot really follow
the rules of society.
You follow the rules
of love and compassion
because we relate to each
other on an individual level.
On the abstract
level of society,
we have a relationship
with each other.
We have a ship, and we
are traveling together
to gain something together.
Glories, progress, whatever.
Satisfaction.
And outside, causes
and consequences.
>>REGINA: So what happens
when, as in America,
you completely remove art
from the educational system?
For example, that's no longer--
>>RADOS: You create robots.
You create machines.
You create soldiers,
workers, and warriors.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about that for a bit.
I mean, you've bridged
different kinds of cultures.
And you know,
what's interesting,
I always found interesting in
the day about the Soviet empire
is that arts-- the
arts were elevated,
where here at the same time,
they were being destroyed.
>>RADOS: Art was controlled.
>>REGINA: But controlled, yes.
And I want you to explain
this whole thing to us.
>>RADOS: But even Western
art was controlled.
Because you see,
through controlling art,
you're controlling
consciousness directly.
You see?
You are giving consciousness
rules and obligations.
That's called social
engineering, you see?
We are-- Hollywood
is a big [INAUDIBLE],
educating the entire
world what to think.
Creating movement in society.
You see?
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, this subject I
find really fascinating.
For example, you've shown at
to Tate, I go into the Tate,
and there are times
I have to walk out,
there's so much
dissonance in the art.
So much-- it is
modern art, of course,
so it's whatever the
impression of the artist.
But for me as a being, I'll
find so much dissonance in it.
And I have read about
CIA agendas having
to do between the
Soviets and the Americans
and the control of
art and so forth.
I mean, I get all that.
We can go down the
conspiracy theory rabbit hole
pretty easily on this one.
And I think a lot of
it is possibly true.
But interestingly, I had
read a particular document
that appeared in the
Congressional Journal.
And it had to do with a
judiciary subcommittee
of some kind was
hearing testimony
regarding an infiltration
into the communist agenda.
Whatever communist agenda
actually means in America.
And one of the things--
a few of the points.
And one was for the
communists to gain control
of any editorial
positions having
to do with art in
the publications
throughout the country, to gain
positions as museum curators.
And then to promote
asymmetry in art.
Now I bring this up because
you were doing modern art.
But what you're doing
now is this incredibly
symmetrical, beautiful,
geometrical representation
of consciousness.
Can you talk about-- I
know I just brought up
a lot of things-- can you
tie that all together,
what's happening?
>>RADOS: I can.
One day in my studio, two events
brought me to a realization.
One event was I had
that studio Dean Clough,
Halifax with 20 artists,
international artists.
Huge, big complex.
Used to be a carpet factory
owned by Sir Ernest Hall who
socialized with
Prince Charles and who
married one of the
royalties, aristocrat.
And he brought one Lord to
my studio, appointed directly
by queen.
Because as a part
of agreement, I
had to open my studio
for public, for a day.
Whoever wants to come to chat
with an artist is welcome.
And he brought a
Lord because he was
visiting Halifax, that
complex, came as a friend.
I was very well
known as an artist.
People used to stop me
on the street saying,
oh, I've seen you in-- whatever.
Daily Telegraph.
I've seen you in BBC.
>>REGINA: You're a big deal.
Absolutely.
>>RADOS: It flattered
my ego at the time.
And the Lord came, and
he didn't look at my art.
He was looking at the ceiling.
He said, where do you live?
I said, nowhere.
And he said, where are you from?
I said, I just told you.
Nowhere.
He said, who are you?
I said, nobody.
He said, that cannot be.
First time he looked at my eyes.
He said, this cannot be.
I said, it can because
it's my reality.
What is your reality, I said.
He said, how dare you?
I said, what?
Asking you about your reality.
Who are you?
Where are you from?
He said, this is nonsense.
He left my studio.
And Ernest Hall said, what
did you do to that man?
I said, nothing.
I was just myself.
So that was one event.
Another one, two days later,
someone knocked on my door.
Artist.
Which I'm not going
to mention his name.
And he said, Ivan, uh,
my master sent me to you.
And I said, your master?
He said, yeah.
Grandmaster.
And we usually don't do that.
But we would like you
to consider joining us.
I said, who are you?
>>REGINA: Of which order?
>>RADOS: Order.
Masonic order.
Halifax is well known for that.
I said, oh, OK.
So to be a mason.
He said, yeah.
You deserve that.
I said, can you say to
your Lord, to your master,
I'm really grateful.
I really, really am grateful
for this opportunity
to join your cause,
whatever that cause is.
But I have to stay myself.
I have to respect myself.
I am never going
to join anything.
But please, you master
would understand that.
He said, I appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
And I came home and
I said to my wife--
I haven't seen her for
three days, those three,
four days that Lord happened
and that event happened.
I said, you know what happened?
That Lord came and
he left, furious.
And then two days later,
they asked me to join masons.
Oh Ivan, and what did you say?
I said, no.
And she said, you just
refused your success.
You just said no
to your success.
And you clashed the entire
structure of society
by pointing at the Lord and
saying, you are not my Lord.
And after that, everything's
changing because then I
start seeing things.
And that five days
happens and then, bang.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
So you found this
kind of congruently
within yourself
after this five days,
this clash between these
parts of your own mind.
And I want to go back to
what I brought up earlier.
This clash with our own
perception on something
as simple as asymmetry
versus symmetry.
>>RADOS: Exactly.
So my point here is, if
you follow certain rules,
if you follow
certain norms, if you
are using your creativity
just to prove your own ego,
then you're a majority.
Only individuals
who are using art
to explore who they are on
that path of real creativity.
Everything else is a
flower, a plastic flower
while inner exploration through
creativity is your awakening,
is the real fragrance of flower.
It's the real
meditation, you see.
So very rarely you
will find real artist.
If you find real
artist, guarantee
99.99%, that artist does not
belong to any organization,
is individual.
He is exhibiting in small
galleries somewhere else.
Big galleries are there to
guide people what to think.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Including the Tate.
>>RADOS: Including the Tate.
Because you see, it's the
play between-- the secret
is using the symbology, using
sacred geometry to enclose
the space you are in.
When you're enclosed in that
space, you become finite.
You're not infinite anymore.
You're not exploring yourself
in the infinite field
of possibilities.
You have only a couple
And those possibilities,
only those possibilities
are promoted in galleries
as a way to control people.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about modern art.
Let's talk about what modern
art does to control people,
versus Renaissance
or classic art.
Let's talk about the
different kinds of control.
>>RADOS: What's modern art?
>>REGINA: Well, I
mean abstract art.
Not modern, but let's
say very abstract art.
>>RADOS: Very abstract art.
Abstract art refers
to abstract mind.
So only abstract mind can
understand abstract art.
So abstract mind is the thought
that you cannot control,
that you're not aware of
that this there in repetitive
situation.
Always moving, you know?
Coming and coming, coming
and going, coming and going.
It's an exploration
of the same phenomena
over and over and over again.
That's called zombie state.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And did I misunderstand you?
Did you say abstract art
perpetuates that state?
>>RADOS: Exactly.
Because to understand
the abstract art,
you have to have abstract mind.
>>REGINA: OK.
I understand what
you're saying now.
That's very interesting.
>>RADOS: You see, if
you have whole mind,
whole mind is no mind.
Whole mind is the mind hollow.
Hollow bamboo.
On one side is divine,
one other side is you.
You can call the divine god.
You can call the
divine wholeness,
existence, the truth.
On the other side is you.
The mind is the link, is a tube
between infinite and something
that is finite.
As appearance.
It appears as
finite, but it's not.
It's just a bubble.
It appears that way.
But the mind is there as a link.
Once you clog your mind
with thoughts, then
you disconnect yourself
from the wholeness.
>>REGINA: Which abstract
art forces you to do.
>>RADOS: Exactly.
>>REGINA: That's
what I always felt.
And I felt that it was
in itself an agenda,
particularly after reading
that particular-- that entry
in the Congressional
Journal right after Kennedy
was assassinated.
>>RADOS: It's the way to
control people's consciousness.
It's not to control their mind.
Their mind is
already controlled.
Because your mind
is not your mind.
It's society's mind.
So you don't have your thoughts.
You don't think your thoughts.
You cannot say, oh, this
thought is very original.
It's mine.
No, it's not.
Your thought is
recycled thought.
Borrowed thought.
Someone else thought that
before, and before, and before.
It's there, circulating,
coming and going.
That's called karma.
That's called reincarnation.
You are coming back again to
the same structure of the mind,
the same reality of the mind
where thoughts are rolling.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now we look at art
where you're maybe
going in for an experience.
But if we go into
abstract art fully,
you have to engage the
mind down that chute.
>>RADOS: You have to.
You have to focus.
>>REGINA: You can't just--
>>RADOS: You cannot
take it whole.
You see, the mind
cannot take it whole.
The mind either is in the
past or in the future.
Lost.
You know?
The moment now does not
belong to the time frame.
It's now.
Now is life
happening infinitely.
Now there are no thoughts.
The wholeness does not think.
God does not have
any thoughts of you.
God is ultimate awareness of
itself, and that's what now is.
When you become aware
that you are now,
you don't have any mind.
You have a machine, a tool that
you can use if you need it.
You can focus yourself
if you need it.
But if your focus is 24
hours a day, 356 days a year,
then that's the abstract.
So you're creating a separate
reality out of the wholeness,
from the wholeness.
You are in separation.
You're in this connected
state of being.
And then you are there
to rule and to be ruled.
>>REGINA: I really
appreciate your--
it's the first
time I've actually
asked an artist about
this, and you've
explained it in a way that
is totally congruent with me.
That's my feeling about it.
Now let's talk
about what you did
when you-- moving into
geometry, sacred geometry,
and the beautiful yantras
you do, what happened there?
>>RADOS: You see,
when you're going--
in order to attain something,
you need to have an effort,
do you?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>RADOS: First of all, you
would need to have idea.
>>REGINA: And a
decision, a commitment.
>>RADOS: Idea.
And then from idea,
immediately desire comes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: But you see, you
have to understand desire.
Desire can be positive,
can be negative.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And talk about
that a little bit.
>>RADOS: So you can say, OK.
I would like to
attain this, I would
like to achieve this idea.
Or your desire might be,
I will never get that.
Meaning it's a desire.
You're going to get
that at one point,
but you are rejecting the mind.
And mind is there in sub level
saying, oh, we can accept,
we can reject.
But either way, we
will get what we want.
So you have to have idea.
You have to have a desire.
And then you have
to make an effort.
You have to be motivated
to go through that effort
in order to attain it.
>>REGINA: And the desire
is the motivation.
>>RADOS: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And that's a missing
element a lot in new age work.
>>RADOS: But new age
work is saying, oh, you
have to believe that
it will be attainable.
No, you don't.
You know, the mind is a belief.
So now you are talking
about confirming the mind
with more mind.
No.
The mind is a belief.
Nothing else believe
in separated reality.
That's what mind is.
It's not reality.
It's a separation.
It's a bubble outside of
the wholeness, outside
of existence.
What's the bubble?
It's just illusion.
It's your thinking about
something that happened,
unresolved, unlived, the memory
stored somewhere in your past.
Or projected future.
That's the bubble.
While their life is
happening right now,
your consciousness is right now,
your awareness is right now,
God is right now.
We are missing that all the time
when we are locked in our mind,
believing that we are
our mind, believing
that we are our thoughts.
When you disconnect
yourself from that belief,
you immediately then desire
to attain the unattainable.
But the desire is good.
That's the point.
>>REGINA: Desire is the fuel
for creation of all things.
>>RADOS: Then you desire,
and then you use an effort,
and then you are motivated,
and you go to discover that.
>>REGINA: Now that's
positive use of desire.
>>RADOS: That's right.
But it can be
another mind attempt
to sabotage your
effort to find yourself
if you continue doing that
effort without abandoning it.
You have to stop
using the effort.
You have to stop.
>>REGINA: So you
use the effort--
>>RADOS: You use the
energy, and you relax.
You use the energy,
and you relax.
When you use the energy, move
that energy, then their energy
re-manifests itself the way
it needs to manifest itself.
Who are you to
control that energy?
If you try to control
it, you are in duality.
You never know the result.
Then you are in suffering.
Then you're in big surprise.
It might turn ugly at the end.
You never know.
>>REGINA: Too much efforting.
>>RADOS: So when
you put an effort
and you give that
effort to the wholeness,
it will materialize
itself in a way,
if it needs to materialize.
It will manifest itself if
it needs to manifest itself.
And you are grateful.
When you are grateful
for that, you're
at peace with who you are.
And then creativity flows
because you become open, fluid.
You become that hollow bamboo.
You become no mind where you
can use the mind in order
to create, designate,
and communicate--
>>REGINA: As your servant.
>>RADOS: As your servant.
As your tool.
I'm not my car I'm driving.
I'm a driver of that
car, but I'm not driving.
I'm enjoying driving.
I am enjoying.
That's the whole purpose of it.
That's the whole point of it.
I'm not my pen, I'm
writing letter to you.
I'm not the message I'm writing.
I'm the movement of that pen,
and when expressing itself,
I'm expressing.
I'm educating myself through
writing you a letter.
And when I write
the letter, I don't
care how you're going
to perceive that letter.
And I don't care about pen.
I care as much that put it
on the place and say, OK.
Now it's safe.
Look after yourself.
If you want to destroy
yourself, do it.
If you want to disappear for
my vision, that's up to you.
If you take my letter with
offense or with gratitude,
that's your decision.
Not mine.
But I did the best
explaining my way.
>>REGINA: Let's
talk about then--
unless you already
have and I didn't
get it-- the way in which
desire can negatively
impact our efforts.
>>RADOS: Desire can
negatively impact our effort
when you desire
to have yourself,
and then you desire to have that
self and achieving that self.
And then your ego becomes big.
When I was kid, I used
to say to my grandma,
I can be a president of
United States of America.
She said, no, you cannot.
I said, yes, I can.
You see?
Maybe from your perspective, I
cannot do that in this reality.
But in another reality, I can.
I can be born in the
family where I will
be prepared to be president.
Because presidents
are not chosen.
They're selected.
Because society
needs them in order
to represent that
controlled structure.
>>REGINA: Very much so.
OK.
So now I'm going to use your
art as the anchor point moving
through consciousness.
So you create this geometry,
this beautiful sacred geometry.
Why and how did that
start expressing itself?
And what was actually
flowing through you?
And then what would
you like to feel
that is giving to humanity?
>>RADOS: When I started painting
while I was four or five years,
I only drew triangles
and circles and squares
and this and that.
Always.
>>REGINA: Most kids just
go to sacred geometry.
>>RADOS: While
everyone was studying
math, mathematics, equations,
I drew something else out
of the blue.
So later on, I went into
phantasmagoria, my dreams.
Going through that process
of going through the mind.
Because when you go
through the mind,
what you're going to find
when you go through the mind,
you're going to find
positive, negative.
And the tension between
positive and negative
and all other
things in that space
between positive
and negative, clash
of different elements, different
poles and the extremes.
And then when you come
beyond the mind-- I mean,
you don't come beyond the mind.
The mind drops itself and
you are already beyond.
Then the only way that
you can be creative
is to use something more
balanced, more significant
that relates to consciousness.
As one focus for you to retain
the level of consciousness,
and as a portal for
someone else to attain
that level of consciousness
if they are drawn into it.
So sacred geometry is
the way not to explain
how the universe works.
All those people
trying to explain
and using equations
and mathematics,
it's one way of explaining,
but it's not the whole.
Sacred geometry is the
consciousness itself.
So when you will
become conscious,
then you use the sacred geometry
without your desire to use it.
I cannot create phantasmagoric
dreams and nightmares anymore.
I cannot do that because I'm
not locked in my mind anymore.
I'm beyond the mind.
So when I'm beyond the
mind, what else to do?
Just to balance everything.
So creating sacred
geometry is the way off
expressing my consciousness
as a reference point,
and also as a portal
for someone else
to find that reference
point of themselves,
if they wish and desire.
You see?
So sacred geometry does
not contain the energy.
But sacred geometry acts as a
portal for your consciousness
to recognize
itself, to recognize
that energy inside ourself.
And use that energy creatively
in order to expand itself.
Not to rule the reality or
change the reality outside,
because reality's changing
itself all the time without you
being involved in it.
You are changing the
perception of who you are,
coming much closer to
the center of your being.
Realizing your illusions.
Realizing your dreams and your
fantasies, your attachments,
your identifications.
Going through the mind
and finally allowing mind
to drop itself and submit itself
to you to be used as a tool.
>>REGINA: So if you
don't mind me asking,
very kind of personally--
not your experience
but perhaps the experience of
others and even your child,
Kai-- when you're
talking about going
through the experience
of the geometrical--
the sacred geometrical
forms or the yantras,
what kind of experiences
are people having?
>>RADOS: OK.
Sacred geometry.
We just look at the
sacred geometry.
Architectural sacred geometry.
If you was a
conscious person, you
want to create
sacred geometry, you
have to be in a certain
level of consciousness
in order to represent
certain geometrical patterns
and shapes.
So I knew it.
But you have to start
from nothing, you see?
It's not an idea.
It's an urge.
With an idea,
you're in your mind.
Mind means idea.
Ideas that are different
than what is at the moment.
What is at the
moment is impulse.
It's a drive from the wholeness.
It's the invitation to move the
energy for the greatest good.
What's the greatest good?
Expansion.
Not expansion of and
progression of the society
and the material order or
whatever, [INAUDIBLE], but
of your consciousness.
So that input creates
certain portal inside of you
where that expression
will happen
and the manifestation
of that sacred geometry.
But first from
nothingness comes the dot.
So the consciousness
is ceding itself
in that nothingness
and that emptiness.
And from that consciousness,
containing all,
contains all the forms, all
the shapes, all the colors,
that dot contains
everything that is.
Consciousness contained that.
Now you have to be
motivated and excited
and use the effort to
create a circle around.
You are enclosing that.
But if you're
enclosing that dot,
you're making actually,
immediately, duality.
Because one dot
creating a circle-- so
it's a bubble in the bubble.
You understand that?
It's a circle in the circle
creating apparent duality,
apparent self.
That apparent self
is just a reflection.
It's a hologram.
So I have to be aware of myself
if I want to know who I am,
you see?
I have to be conscious
of my consciousness.
If I'm just conscious,
what to refer with?
>>REGINA: No reference point.
>>RADOS: No reference
point, you see?
So when you create
that circle, then there
are infinite points
on that circle.
There is one dot, but there are
infinite dots on that circle.
So every single dot is a
reflection of that first dot.
It appears, disappears.
That's your cellular
structure in your body.
I came from one cell.
Trillions of other cells
were born out of it.
So every single cell of your
body is in close relation
with the primordial self
containing the whole.
Because your cell is no
different than my cell.
Different information,
different vibration
but containing the whole.
Any other cell in the
infinite universe is the same.
It's the one cell.
So what we see is
just the appearance
of the same dot appearing
and disappearing,
giving the appearance
of solidity.
When that appearance
of solidity happens,
then you start drawing
the forms there.
From one dot to the other and
triangles and forms and shapes
and all of that.
>>REGINA: Which becomes,
then, a very mathematical--
>>RADOS: Mathematical.
And you give emotions into it
by painting it with colors.
Colors are linked with emotions.
One person came to my
studio, saw my paintings
and said to his wife, run!
Run!
They were running
through the halls.
And while running she
said, why are we running?
And he said, we are
running against colors.
[LAUGHTER]
They were very tight
English people, so--
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: I spent a
lot of time in England.
>>RADOS: Colors brings emotions.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Absolutely.
>>RADOS: Disturbing color,
disturbing emotions.
So you wear your
clothes depending
on what kind of
emotions are surfacing
at that moment in your life.
You might say, oh, I'm
not for blue today,
but I'm for red because I'm
very active emotionally.
>>REGINA: It's a frequency.
>>RADOS: It's a frequency.
So anyways, you put the
emotions into sacred geometry.
But you see, variations of
colors are seen as emotions.
Purity of colors are
seen as feelings.
There's a difference
between feeling and emotion.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And please explain this.
>>RADOS: Emotions
are nothing else
than the chemical reactions
of certain beliefs interpreted
by the mind as feeling.
So emotion of love can
be emotion of hate,
but it's not real love.
Real love is real feeling.
>>REGINA: Feeling, yes.
>>RADOS: What is love
as a real feeling?
And there is only one
emotion out of that one-- no.
There's only one feeling.
There are infinite
number of emotions.
What comes out of
that one feeling?
All other feelings.
One feeling is called love.
Out of that love comes
gratitude, trust, peace,
tranquility, bliss, compassion.
So that feeling is love.
But love is equal to life.
And what life is, what love is--
I mean, it's not sentimental.
It's not, I love
you, you love me.
It's ultimate
acceptance of all that
is right now in this moment.
Ultimate acceptance of
yourself the way you are.
But you don't know who you are.
But you are aware that you are.
You are aware that you are.
That awareness is the
center of the universe.
That awareness is right now.
So from that point, you
will never be the same.
Everything's changed.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now you project
these beautiful pieces--
>>RADOS: And you project
those beautiful images
so you understand
the point of now.
You see?
You understand what balance is.
Balance is not giving
priorities to something
that is outside of you.
The thoughts are outside of you.
Ideas, theories, beliefs,
dogma, this and that.
So you surrender everything
that is in your mind.
You surrender your
mind to nothing.
And you relax, and you
find yourself there
being aware of oneself from
that aspect, from that portal.
So the sacred geometry acts as
a portal to recognize yourself,
to mirror yourself.
>>REGINA: And that is
when you're creating,
I'm assuming you're
creating for yourself.
>>RADOS: No, I don't
create for anyone else.
Just for myself.
>>REGINA: Right.
And so by other people
experiencing it--
>>RADOS: So I don't
create it for myself.
Actually I just don't
have any idea to create.
It just happens.
>>REGINA: So once you create
these beautiful pieces--
and they're out there.
People can access them
now in a variety of ways.
>>RADOS: They can access.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: They have
to look at the dot.
>>REGINA: In the center.
>>RADOS: In the center.
That's all.
That's the second
geometry yantra.
Now it becomes
sacred geometry-- now
it's sacred geometry
representing something.
They're representing my
state of consciousness, OK?
It can act as a portal.
But when you start
to meditating on it,
when you use that
portal, you activate
the-- you activate
the sacred geometry,
and that sacred
geometry becomes yantra.
And yantra means a machine,
a device, a portal.
Now you can use that machine in
order to attain unattainable.
And then looking at the dot.
You look at a dot for 10,
15 minutes, 20 minutes
without blinking,
if you can try that.
You're focusing
your consciousness.
You're focusing your whole
attention to the dot.
The dot will reveal itself
because it contains the whole.
>>REGINA: It's pretty trippy
what happens to the mind.
>>RADOS: Because mind would
like to wander around.
Mind would like to go like a fly
from this place to that place
and explore this, explore that.
For just shortly, I don't want
to have a full experience, just
glimpse of it.
Let's go and get drunk here.
Let's go and get
socially active here.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
But you're right.
When you go in and stay
with that center point,
it is amazing what
shows itself to you.
>>RADOS: And then if
you persist there,
if you were dedicated, if you
are in that process of focusing
your attention to that dot
without moving anywhere else,
your peripheral
vision will remember
all the lines and all shapes and
all the forms, all the colors.
There is that mind thinking
there, thinking and thinking
through the peripheral vision
while your consciousness is
there in the center.
That consciousness
like a laser light,
is penetrating the
thickness of your thinking,
trying to find the gap
between two thoughts.
>>REGINA: The gap
between the thoughts.
Yeah.
>>RADOS: While the thoughts
are there and you witness them,
you see them.
But you don't act like them.
You don't identify
yourself with them.
You leave them to
wander around, to be
in that traffic of business.
You're focusing on
that, on that dot.
At one point, you
close your eyes.
You're going to know
when to close your eyes.
It's not like I'm--
it's enough of me.
I cannot stand it anymore.
It comes like invitation.
Now is the time, and
then you close your eyes.
And what happens is that image
will be there in your mind.
Now you're freezing
that image in your mind.
Your thoughts are stopping
and creating one image.
Now there is a distance
between you and that image.
You are seeing your mind now
for the first time, represented
in that image,
embedded in that mind.
And that image starts spinning--
depends on the sacred geometry.
Spinning, pulsating like a
cell is doing in our body.
And then, poof.
Just disappearing.
And then what do you find?
Nothing at the end.
The result of that
process is nothing.
That's what contains the
thoughts and the things.
You are present there.
You are aware.
And that's what peace
is, love is, life is,
trust, gratitude,
all of that together
in being aware that you are.
>>REGINA: None of
these questions
are what I had planned
on talking to you about.
But I told you
before we started,
I felt this conversation
would take its own direction.
And I love that we're
using art and your artwork
and your own journey
personally to have
this focal point through
which to understand
our consciousness.
And so now let's-- I mean, part
of me doesn't want to go back
to my little list of questions
here and say, well, now,
I read in your
book this and that.
>>RADOS: Hit me
with your question.
>>REGINA: I'll do a couple.
But I want to just finish one
little bit on the art part.
And that is when we're watching
our children create art,
we know art's no longer
encouraged in schools.
If you want art,
the parents have
to provide that
environment for the child.
>>RADOS: Really?
That's in America?
>>REGINA: In America, yeah.
That was the first thing--
a couple decades ago,
they started cutting art out
of the budget immediately.
Art and music went kaput.
So we don't offer
that in our schools
now unless it's
a private school.
Or charter school of some kind.
>>RADOS: The same way as
the society will not provide
meditation classes for you.
>>REGINA: Of course not.
No.
Of course not.
And you don't teach joy.
That's not part
of the curriculum.
It's creating robots.
>>RADOS: It's competition.
Creating competition and greed.
Greed is the quality
now, you know?
Seen as a quality.
>>REGINA: And its
elevated in its status
in the media and such.
So when we see our little
children who are still,
if they're not on
some electrical device
and you give them a pen
and paper or a pencil,
crayons, whatever,
are going to start
doing their little stars
and their little triangles,
and so forth.
What can we do as parents
with them besides just maybe
give them the stuff
and leave them alone?
Or what can we learn
from them by what
their doodles are showing?
>>RADOS: Read those signs.
Because you see, sacred
geometry can imprison you
or it can liberate you.
You just choose the way you want
to use that sacred geometry.
Every sign on the street--
>>REGINA: Yes.
That's all sacred geometry.
>>RADOS: It's controlling
you saying stop, move, left,
one way road.
Every sign you go by, you pass
by the store or window shop,
it's there inviting you.
It's using you, using
your own ability.
Using your sense of
guilt, using your passion,
using your beliefs and your
definition of who you are,
inviting you that
you can be used.
>>REGINA: And you notice those
signs are always right angles.
You almost never see a
circular type of sign.
>>RADOS: That's why
I have this, you see.
You know what's that?
>>REGINA: Flower of life, yeah.
What is that for you?
>>RADOS: What is that for me?
It's balance between
positive and negative.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>RADOS: That's what it is.
It's called the oneness, OK?
It's called flower of life.
We call it flower of life
because it represents flower.
But most of all, it represents
the fragrance of flower
because that enclosure.
See, if you find yourself
in middle of that flower,
then you will smell the
fragrance of divine.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RADOS: So this represents--
this is the symbol of divine.
As I said, dot in the middle.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>RADOS: Enclosure,
so you can draw.
You can draw the balance.
You can create madness in
between dot and the circle,
or you can create a balance.
It's up to you.
When you create the balance,
you connect equal dots
connecting with another
circles like here,
and you have something
that is balance, perfect,
and representing your
feminine and masculine aspect
inside of you that
when you look at it,
then you can relax and
recognize those aspects,
recognize left and right
brain and equalize them
energetically.
At the moment, for
example, we are talking,
and maybe our right hemisphere
is more active than our left.
We are not logical.
We aren't talking mathematics
here and abstract stuff.
We are talking essential stuff.
So our right brain
is more active.
You can even see which
part of the brain
is more active by
measuring the amount of air
through your nose.
Close one because
this nostril is
linked with the other
opposite side of the brain,
and that one over there.
>>REGINA: So my
right brain is open
right now because it's
coming in the left.
>>RADOS: Exactly.
So this is a little secret.
You can balance the
brain hemispheres.
If you attain 50-50%,
then your perception
will come, perception
from the wholeness.
The mind will be less active.
You will have gaps of
emptiness inside of your mind
where the wholeness, as I
explained will come to you
and give you the glory and
gratitude and compassion
and love, acceptance
of yourself,
which will bring
more creativity,
which will bring you more
stability in your life.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I have one for you.
We were talking about
iconic symbols in the world,
and I had just said
that most of what we see
is right angles, whether
it's squares, rectangles,
or whatnot.
However, let's take Apple,
the symbol for Apple.
Which you could say--
I mean, beautiful,
much more-- obviously rounded,
graceful, balanced on one hand.
But on the other,
also a technology
that completely enslaves us.
Our time, our energy,
our minds, and so forth.
Is there an incongruity
or an intention there?
>>RADOS: It's always intention
but not from consciousness.
It's intention.
You see, just listen.
Intention.
In-tention.
>>REGINA: In-tension.
Yeah.
>>RADOS: It is tension.
Because to have intention-- so
you cannot hear-- for example,
just recently I found a
book Wayne Dyer wrote--
>>REGINA: Wayne Dyer.
Yeah.
Wayne Dyer.
>>RADOS: You can use
intention to attain--
to achieve a good car, good
carpet, better house, better
lifestyle, this and that.
But you cannot find
yourself with intention,
because you're going
to be in tension.
So if you continue being in
tension, so you will never,
ever find yourself.
>>REGINA: It's a
tense state to be in.
>>RADOS: Being is an
intense state of being.
So you have to give
up on your tension
in order to attain nonintention.
State nonintentional
state to be.
>>REGINA: Which is what we
were talking about earlier.
You create the idea.
You have to desire,
the motivation.
Then you put the
effort in, which
requires a certain
amount of intention,
and then let go of it.
Otherwise you remain
in tension, right?
>>RADOS: It was intention.
When you are in tension, you
are trapped in your mind.
You are in that tension between
positive and negative clashing
there, so you don't
know what to choose.
You're choosing
sometimes positive
while negative is following you.
Or you might choose negative to
punish yourself or someone else
while positive might come and
represent itself as whatever.
You see, the
complexity of reality
is the mind, the
way of the mind.
Simplicity of reality
is the way of no mind.
Everything is so
simple right now.
Life is happening right now.
Life is not happening
anywhere else apart from now.
So if you are right now,
you're very much alive.
If you have that awareness, if
you have that access to now,
then you will also realize
that you are infinite.
And when you are infinite,
there's no need to worry.
There's no need to be in fear.
There's no need to be anxious.
There's no need to separate
yourself and fantasize
about this and be
lost for some time.
You're present.
You see through everything
that appears in front of you.
So you see, if we are able to
see everything as illusion,
then we find ourselves real
at the end of the journey.
So everything you
are experiencing,
everything you are
seeing, everything
that appears and goes, it's
not real, and it's not you.
Do you get it?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>RADOS: It comes and goes.
It's a world of change.
You appear, you disappear.
I cannot remember-- we had an
interview, great interview.
You remember this.
I could not remember you.
>>REGINA: I remember the
time, it was wonderful.
But, yes.
>>RADOS: But what
I could remember
is your absolute
assertive voice.
And I said, this
person is absolutely
stable in her own self, you see?
That's what you get.
Not the shapes and forms, but
the essence, the consciousness.
So your body's
different than my body.
Your mind has a
different structure
than my body-- than
my mind and my body.
Your emotions fluctuate
differently than my emotions.
We are different in
outside circumstances.
But we are one and
the same in oneness.
Your consciousness
and my consciousness
is one consciousness.
When you become conscious
of who you are and I
become conscious of who you are,
I'll recognize myself in you.
Because your consciousness
is all about goodness, peace,
tranquility, love, happiness,
contentment in the moment.
That's the same in me.
So I recognize myself in you.
And that's what love is.
I love you, you see?
And you love me.
Actually, I accept
you the way you are.
If you decide to go
a little bit dreamy,
go and confirm to society that
you are valuable, available,
part of it.
So find good.
I'm OK with that.
And I will wait the moment
when I will recognize myself
in you again, and
we'll be together,
and love will be
there to be shared.
Do you get it?
>>REGINA: I do.
And-- wow.
OK.
We're out of time.
We actually went over time.
I've enjoyed myself so
much because I've just
been floating in the
right hemisphere,
just soaking in
what you're saying.
And I'm so glad we totally
diverted from my plan.
[LAUGHTER]
>>RADOS: I didn't like your
plan anyway at the beginning.
[LAUGHTER]
It's a good plan, actually.
Very good plan.
I mean, I'm joking.
It's a really good plan.
>>REGINA: Well, listen, we
didn't talk about your books,
but you've got a lot of them.
So we'll just go ahead
and wrap this up,
and I just want to
say thank you so much.
I really thoroughly enjoyed the
conversation and just literally
floating in that space with you.
>>RADOS: I'm very grateful
for you to appear in my life.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
>>RADOS: Because I recognize
myself more in you.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: And vice versa.
To connect more deeply
with Ivan's work,
you can go to ivanrados.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]